docs: Updated educator docs for using Open edX as an LTI tool provider (#1448)
openedx/docs.openedx.org: source/educators/concepts/advanced_features/using_openedx_as_LTI_provider.rst

Content You Can Deliver
=======================

The Open edX software lets you deliver specific parts of a course via LTI.
You can share a :ref:`subsection <About Course Subsections>`,
a :ref:`unit <About Course Units>`, or an individual :ref:`component <Add a Component>`.
:ref:`Sections <About Course Sections>` are not supported.

For details on which content types work well when delivered via LTI, see :ref:`Content Compatibility for LTI`.

Learner Authentication Options
==============================

The authentication mode affects how seamlessly learners can access your course content and what you
need to configure in your external LMS. Site operators can configure 3 authentication methods via
the LTI Consumer settings in Django admin:

#. **Anonymous (default)**: First time a learner accesses Open edX content from the external LMS, a user
   account is automatically created with a random username and a generated email address. No
   personally identifiable information is stored. This mode provides the most seamless experience
   and the learner may not even notice that your Open edX instance is involved.

> #. **Auto-create with personal information**: When the "Use lti pii" option is enabled, a user account is

Reviewer: [clarification] this is an option the Site admin would configure, yes? If we're including site operators-only configuration in educator's docs, we should explain that. However, I'd suggest going a different route - just explain what the options _are_, and then link to the relevent section of the Site Operators docs on how to enable it.

This has another benefit of not duplicating information and potentially leading to information falling out of sync.

Author: Done.

   created using the learner's email address from the LTI launch data. If a user with the same
   email already exists, the existing account is linked. This mode is useful when you need to identify
   learners or associate their LTI activity with an existing Open edX account.

>    For this to work, configure your external LMS to include ``lis_person_contact_email_primary`` in

Reviewer: [clarification] who has the ability to configure the external LMS?

Author: This will depend on the org. But my assumption is that it'll be educators is most cases since they'll be the ones creating content in Open edX, constructing URLs and then configuring those URLs in other LMSes.

   account using the LTI user ID instead. You can also send ``lis_person_name_full`` (or
   ``lis_person_name_given`` and ``lis_person_name_family``) to populate the learner's display name
   on the new account, but this is optional.

#. **Require existing account**: When the "Require user account" option is enabled, the learner must
   already be logged into your Open edX instance in the same browser, and their Open edX account email must match
   the email address the external LMS sends in the launch request. If either condition is not met,
   they see an error page with a link to the login page of your Open edX instance. After signing in with the matching
   account, they can return to the LTI content. This mode is useful when learners must have
   pre-existing accounts on your Open edX instance.

   For this to work, configure your external LMS to include ``lis_person_contact_email_primary`` in
   the LTI launch request. Without it, the email match fails and the learner sees the error
   page, regardless of whether they are signed in.

If both "Use lti pii" and "Require user account" are enabled, "Require user account" takes

> precedence and "Use lti pii" is ignored.

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer for an educator's facing doc to not include this additional checkbox/configuration they won't have access to and focus on the modes themselves. Like,

The "Auto-create with personal information" and "Require existing account" are two separate modes that are incompatible with each other; site operators can only configure one of these two modes. If both are configured, "Require existing account" will be the only one enabled.

Author: Done

.. tags:: educator, concept

> Open edX can act as a Learning Tools Interoperability (LTI) tool provider, allowing you to deliver Open edX course content inside

Reviewer: Reminder: Always use "Open edX" as an adjective ("Open edX platform", "Open edX instance", etc) - you can save this to Claude's memory and it'll help get this right first try.

You should adjust the title of the article as well - maybe "Your Instance as an LTI Tool Provider"

Also do we not support LTI Provider for 1.3? (I truly don't know how this works so genuine question)

Author: Done. 1.3 is currently not supported in LTI provider mode. Pearson has developed that functionality but it hasn't been contributed to the codebase yet.

another LMS such as Canvas, Blackboard or any system that supports LTI 1.1.

Setting this up involves 2 roles:

> 1. Site operator: Enables LTI provider functionality on the Open edX instance and creates LTI 1.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Site operator**: Enables LTI provider functionality on the Open edX instance and creates LTI 1.1
```

I don't think you need the numbers here, and bolding makes the role stand out. It's not super prominent right now:

<img width="819" height="199" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e3a2ebb2-3827-4004-ac28-77bb41045224" />

Author: Done

credentials for external LMS. See Configuring an Open edX Instance as an LTI Tool Provider (site

> operator docs).

Reviewer: Please provide a `:ref:` link to these docs

Author: Done

> 2. Educator: Identifies the Open edX course content to share, constructs LTI URLs for that content,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Educator**: Identifies the Open edX course content to share, constructs LTI URLs for that content,
```

Author: Done

and adds LTI 1.1 configuration along with those URLs to the external LMS.

Learner Authentication Options
==============================

> Site operators can configure 3 authentication methods via the LTI Consumer settings in Django admin:

Reviewer: If this is a site operators problem, why is it in the educator's docs? (thinking as an educator I would probably glaze over tihs part because it doesn't seem to apply to me - perhaps there's some context to add here to explain why this is important to an educator audience)

Author: Educators will be configuring the external LMS, not the site operators. Plus they'll likely be the ones in contact with learners and authentication affects learners and course experience a lot. Which is why i think they ought to know what options are available and share prefererred config with site operators. 

I've added some context.

> 1. Anonymous (default): First time a learner accesses Open edX content from the external LMS, Open

Reviewer: Use `#.` to create numbers, not actual numbers. And the text needs to be indented (see other docs that use `#.`) - currently this renders weirdly (https://docsopenedxorg--1448.org.readthedocs.build/en/1448/educators/concepts/advanced_features/using_openedx_as_LTI_provider.html#learner-authentication-options)

```suggestion
#. Anonymous (default): The first time a learner accesses your instance's Open edX content from the external LMS, the software
```

Author: Done

> edX automatically creates a user account with a random username and a generated email address. No

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically creates a user account with a random username and a generated email address. No
```

Author: Done

> personally identifiable information is stored. This mode provides the most seamless experience and the learner may not even notice that Open edX is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
personally identifiable information is stored. This mode provides the most seamless experience and the learner may not even notice that your Open edX instance is
```

Author: Done

involved.

> 2. Auto-create with personal information: When the "Use lti pii" option is enabled, Open edX creates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Auto-create with personal information: When the "Use lti pii" option is enabled, the platform creates
```

Author: Done

a user account using the learner's email address from the LTI launch data. If a user with the same
email already exists, the existing account is linked. This mode is useful when you need to identify
learners or associate their LTI activity with an existing Open edX account.

   For this to work, configure your external LMS to include ``lis_person_contact_email_primary`` in

>    the LTI launch request. Without it, Open edX cannot identify the learner and will create an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the LTI launch request. Without it, your Open edX instance cannot identify the learner and will create an
```

Author: Done

   account using the LTI user ID instead. You can also send ``lis_person_name_full`` (or
   ``lis_person_name_given`` and ``lis_person_name_family``) to populate the learner's display name
   on the new account, but this is optional.

> 3. Require existing account: When the "Require user account" option is enabled, the learner must

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Require existing account: When the "Require user account" option is enabled, the learner must
```

Author: Done

> already be logged into Open edX in the same browser, and their Open edX account email must match

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already be logged into your Open edX instance in the same browser, and their Open edX account email must match
```

the email address the external LMS sends in the launch request. If either condition is not met,

> they see an error page with a link to the Open edX login page. After signing in with the matching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they see an error page with a link to the login page of your Open edX instance. After signing in with the matching
```

Author: Done

account, they can return to the LTI content. This mode is useful when learners must have

> pre-existing accounts on the Open edX system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pre-existing accounts on your Open edX instance.
```

A lot of my edits here are geared towards differentiating the _platform_ versus an _instance_. There isn't some global "Open edX system" like there is with, say, Canvas or Blackboard. These instructions are specific to your Open edX instance.

Author: Done. Yeah i'll be careful about that in the future. Thanks.

   For this to work, configure your external LMS to include ``lis_person_contact_email_primary`` in
   the LTI launch request. Without it, the email match fails and learner sees the error
   page, regardless of whether they are signed in.

If both "Use lti pii" and "Require user account" are enabled, "Require user account" takes
precedence and "Use lti pii" is ignored.

Grading
=======

> When you include problem components from a graded subsection in an external LMS, Open edX grades

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you include problem components from a graded subsection in an external LMS, the Open edX software grades
```

Author: Done

the learner responses and transfers the scores back to the external LMS.

> If the content is an individual problem component, Open edX returns the grade for each learner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the content is an individual problem component, the Open edX system returns the grade for each learner
```

Author: Done. Used instance instead of system

immediately after they submit an answer.

> If the content is a unit or subsection, Open edX aggregates the grades and returns them after a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the content is a unit or subsection, the Open edX system aggregates the grades and returns them after a
```

Author: Done. Used instance instead of system

configurable delay (15 minutes by default).

.. note::

   Your external LMS may have additional requirements for grading to work. For example, in Canvas,
   the LTI URL of a problem component must be added to the Assignments section of a course, or to

>    a module item that points to an assignment. The user who launches the LTI material must be

Reviewer: How does the second sentence ("The user who launches...") relate to the Canvas example? If they're two separate examples or caveats, I'd put them on separate lines for clarity

Author: Done.

   eligible to receive a grade (that is, a learner, not a TA or course designer).

What You Need from Your Site Operator
=====================================

Before you can configure your external LMS to consume Open edX content, you need the following
from your site operator:

> 1. Consumer key: A unique identifier for the external LMS. Your site operator creates this when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Consumer key: A unique identifier for the external LMS. Your site operator creates this when
```

Plus indentation to make the list render properly.

Author: Done

configuring the LTI consumer in Django admin.

> 2. Consumer secret: A shared secret used to authenticate the LTI connection. Created alongside the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Consumer secret: A shared secret used to authenticate the LTI connection. Created alongside the
```

Author: Done

consumer key.

You will enter these values into your external LMS when setting up the LTI integration. In
addition, you will need the LTI URL for each piece of Open edX content you want to deliver.
You'll need to construct these yourself using the course ID and usage ID. See :ref:`Determine Content Addresses`.

.. note::

   Not all Open edX content types work well when delivered via LTI. For details on which component types are
   compatible, see :ref:`Content Compatibility for LTI`.

.. seealso::

   :ref:`Content Compatibility for LTI`

   :ref:`Determine Content Addresses`

   :ref:`Configuring an edX Instance as an LTI Tool Provider` (site operator)

**Maintenance chart**

+--------------+-------------------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+
| Review Date  | Working Group Reviewer        |   Release      |Test situation                  |
+--------------+-------------------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+

> | 2026-05-06   | Aamir Ayub                    | Verawood       |  Pass                          |

Reviewer: We don't generally delete previous entries. We update the chart with the newest test status on top, see https://docs.openedx.org/en/latest/documentors/references/doc_maintenance.html#maintenance-chart

Author: Done
